# SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/acr/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/bar/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/bios/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/bus/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/clk/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/devinit/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/fault/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/fb/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/fuse/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/gpio/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/gsp/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/i2c/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/iccsense/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/instmem/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/ltc/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/mc/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/mmu/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/mxm/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/pci/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/pmu/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/privring/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/therm/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/timer/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/top/Kbuild
include $(src)/nvkm/subdev/volt/Kbuild
